8 ovm, MET. 1

os Pentheus at the hands of the Bacchae, and the death
of Achilles.

ovid, in fau-t, wanders at will through the world of
legend, and selec-ts any story that he chooses to embel-
lish with his poetic fancy. And, therefore, we cannot
expect to find a true artistic unity in the Metamor-
phoses. Here we touch upon the weak point of the
poem. In every poetical composition the most important
clement is unity of subject. There must be a centre
round which the less important characters and episodes
may be grouped, and towards which they all may tend.
But in the Metamwphoses we have a number of tales
connected in some cases by the slightest tie, and each
with its own special interest. It is true that the poem
begins with the creation of the world, and ends with
Rome, the deification of Julius Caesar, and the reign of
Augustus; but the intervening episodes have no neces-
sary connexion with the beginning or the end of the
whole composition. The principle of artistic unity
stands out clearly, to illustrate our meaning by a com-
parison, in Virgil's Aeneid, with which the Metamor-
phoses invite comparison by their compaSS‚ their metre,
and their mythological character. In the Aeneid the
poet‘s scheme is clear. It is to connect the Imperial
House of Julius and Augustus wit-h the ancient family of
Aeneas and Iulus of Troy. Aeneas is the central figure,
and the central motive is the idea of bringing him and
his Trojans, through many difficulties, to the soil of
Latium in Italy, there to be allied to a native Italian
stock, the progenitors of the Romans. This is a real
artistic unity of conception and treatment; but no such
unity can be discovered in the Metamorphoses.

In spite, then, of the heroic metre. and 111 spite of the

